draft-ietf-opsec-probe-attribution.md, before:

---
title: "Attribution of Internet Probes"
abbrev: "Probes Attribution"
category: info
submissiontype: IETF
docname: draft-ietf-opsec-probe-attribution-latest
ipr: trust200902
area: "Operations and Management"
workgroup: "Operational Security Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure"
keyword: Internet-Draft
venue:
  group: "Operational Security Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure"
  type: "Working Group"
  mail: "opsec@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/opsec/"
  github: "evyncke/opsec-probe-attribution"
  latest: "https://evyncke.github.io/opsec-probe-attribution/draft-ietf-opsec-probe-attribution.html"

stand_alone: yes
smart_quotes: no
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: E. Vyncke
    name: Éric Vyncke
    organization: Cisco
    street: De Kleetlaan 64
    code: 1831
    city: Diegem
    country: Belgium
    email: evyncke@cisco.com
 -
    ins: B. Donnet
    name: Benoît Donnet
    organization: Université de Liège
    country: Belgium
    email: benoit.donnet@uliege.be
 -
    ins: J. Iurman
    name: Justin Iurman
    organization: Université de Liège
    country: Belgium
    email: justin.iurman@uliege.be

normative:

informative:
  LARGE_SCALE:
    title: Efficient Algorithms for Large-Scale Topology Discovery
    target: https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/1071690.1064256
    date: 2005
    seriesinfo:
      DOI: 10.1145/1071690.1064256
    author:
      -
        name: Benoît Donnet
        org: Université Pierre & Marie Curie Laboratoire LiP6–CNRS
      -
        name: Philippe Raoult
        org: Université Pierre & Marie Curie Laboratoire LiP6–CNRS
      -
        name: Timur Friedman
        org: Université Pierre & Marie Curie Laboratoire LiP6–CNRS
      -
        name: Mark Crovella
        org: Boston University Computer Science Department
  IPV6_TOPOLOGY:
    title: In the IP of the Beholder Strategies for Active IPv6 Topology Discovery
    target: http://www.cmand.org/papers/beholder-imc18.pdf
    date: 2018
    seriesinfo:
      DOI: 10.1145/3278532.3278559
    author:
      -
        name: Robert Beverly
        org: Naval Postgraduate School
      -
        name: Ramakrishnan Durairajan
        org: University of Oregon
      -
        name: David Plonka
        org: Akamai Technologies
      -
        name: Justin P. Rohrer
        org: Naval Postgraduate School
  IPV4_TOPOLOGY:
    title: Yarrp’ing the Internet Randomized High-Speed Active Topology Discovery
    target: http://www.cmand.org/papers/yarrp-imc16.pdf
    date: 2016
    seriesinfo:
      DOI: 10.1145/2987443.2987479
    author:
      -
        name: Robert Beverly
        org: Naval Postgraduate School


--- abstract

Active measurements at Internet-scale can target either collaborating parties or non-collaborating ones. Sometimes these measurements are viewed as unwelcome or aggressive. This document proposes some simple techniques allowing any party or organization to understand what this unsolicited packet is, what is its purpose, and more importantly who to contact.


--- middle

# Introduction

Active measurements at Internet-scale can target either collaborating parties or non-collaborating ones. Such measurements include {{LARGE_SCALE}} and {{?RFC7872}}.

Sending unsolicited probes should obviously be done at a rate low enough to not unduly impact the other parties resources. But even at a low rate, those probes could trigger an alarm that will request some investigation by either the party receiving the probe (i.e., when the probe destination address is one address assigned to the receiving party) or by a third party having some devices where those probes are transiting (e.g., an Internet transit router).

This document suggests some simple techniques allowing any party or organization to understand:

- what this unsolicited packet is,

- what is its purpose,

- and more significantly who to contact for further information or to stop the probing.

Note: it is expected that only researchers with no bad intentions will use these techniques.

# Probe / Measurement Description

## Probe Description URI {#uri}

This document defines a "probe description URI" (see {{text}}) as a URI pointing to:

- a "Probe Description", see {{text}}, e.g., "https://example.net/measurement.txt";

- an email address, e.g., "mailto:eric@example.net";

- a phone number to call, e.g., "tel:+1-201-555-0123".

## Probe Description Text {#text}

Similarly, as in {{!RFC9116}}, when a node probes other nodes over the Internet, it should create a text file following the syntax described in section 3 of {{!RFC9116}} and should have the following fields:

- contact;

- expires;

- preferred-languages.

Plus, another one "description" which is a URI pointing a document describing the measurement.

# Out-of-band Probe Attribution

When it is not possible to include the "probe description URI" in the probe packet itself, then a specific URI must be constructed based on the source address of the probe packet following {{!RFC8615}}, e.g., for a probe source address of 2001:db8::dead, the following URI are constructed:

- if the reverse DNS record for 2001:db8::dead exists, e.g., "example.net", then the URI is "https://example.net/.well-known/probing.txt" ;

- else (or in addition), the URI is "https://\[2001:db8::dead\]/.well-known/probing.txt". In this case, there might be a certificate verification issue.

The constructed URI must be a reference to the "Probe description Text" (see {{text}}).

# In-band Probe Attribution

When the desired measurement allows for it, one "probe description URI" should be included in the payload of all probes sent. This could be:

- for a {{!RFC4443}} ICMPv6 echo request: in the optional data (see section 4.1 of {{!RFC4443}});

- for a {{!RFC792}} ICMPv4 echo request: in the optional data;

- for a {{!RFC768}} UDP datagram: in the data part;

- for a {{!RFC793}} TCP packet with the SYN flag: data is allowed in TCP packets with the SYN flag per section 3.4 of {{!RFC793}} (2nd paragraph). However, it may change the way the packet is processed;

- for a {{!RFC8200}} IPv6 packet with either hop-by-hop or destination options headers, in a PadN option. However, the PadN option is not recommended: as per the informational {{?RFC4942}}, section 2.1.9.5, it is suggested that PadN options should only contain 0's and be smaller than 8 octets, thus limiting its use for probe attribution. Indeed, inserting the URI in PadN options could bias the measurement itself. For example, the Linux Kernel follows these recommendations since its version 3.5;

- etc.

The URI should start at the first octet of the payload and should be terminated by an octet of 0x00, i.e., it must be null terminated. If the URI cannot be placed at the beginning of the payload, then it should be preceded by an octet of 0x00.

Note: the above techniques produce a valid and legitimate packet for all the nodes forwarding the probe, except maybe for a hop-by-hop options header with a PadN option containing the URI. As for the receiver, it may or may not process the packet, depending on where the "probe description URI" is included (e.g., TCP SYN flag with the URI included in data, destination options header with a PadN option containing the URI). As a consequence, a response may not be received. The choice of the URI location is important but depends on the situation, which is why multiple possibilities are proposed in this document.

# Ethical Considerations

Executing some measurement experiences over the global Internet obviously require some ethical considerations when transit/destination non-solicited parties are involved.

This document proposes a common way to identity the source and the purpose of active probing in order to reduce the potential burden on the non-solicited parties.

But there are other considerations to be taken into account: from the payload content (e.g., is the encoding valid ?) to the transmission rate (see also {{IPV6_TOPOLOGY}} and {{IPV4_TOPOLOGY}} for some probing speed impacts). Those considerations are out of scope of this document.

# Security Considerations

While it is expected that only researchers with no bad intentions will use these techniques, they will simplify and shorten the time to identify a probing across the Internet.

This information is provided to identify the source and intent of specific probes, but there is no authentication possible for the inline information.  As a result, a malevolent actor could provide false information while conducting the probes, so that the action was attributed to a third party.  The recipient of this information cannot, as a result, rely on this information without confirmation.  If a recipient cannot confirm the information or does not wish to do so, they should treat the flows as if there were no attribution.

# IANA Considerations

The "Well-Known URIs" registry should be updated with the following:

- additional values (using the template from {{!RFC8615}}):

- URI suffix: probing.txt

- Change controller: IETF

- Specification document(s): this document

- Status: permanent



--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

The authors would like to thank Alain Fiocco, Fernando Gont, Ted Hardie, Mehdi Kouhen, and Mark Townsley for helpful discussions as well as Raphaël Léas for an early implementation.

The authors would also like to gracefully acknowledge useful review and comments received from Warren Kumari.

Commit message:

[Review] Prapanch Ramamoorthy
Proposals regarding Prapanch's review.

Closes #2

draft-ietf-opsec-probe-attribution.md, after:

---
title: "Attribution of Internet Probes"
abbrev: "Probes Attribution"
category: info
submissiontype: IETF
docname: draft-ietf-opsec-probe-attribution-latest
ipr: trust200902
area: "Operations and Management"
workgroup: "Operational Security Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure"
keyword: Internet-Draft
venue:
  group: "Operational Security Capabilities for IP Network Infrastructure"
  type: "Working Group"
  mail: "opsec@ietf.org"
  arch: "https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/opsec/"
  github: "evyncke/opsec-probe-attribution"
  latest: "https://evyncke.github.io/opsec-probe-attribution/draft-ietf-opsec-probe-attribution.html"

stand_alone: yes
smart_quotes: no
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
 -
    ins: E. Vyncke
    name: Éric Vyncke
    organization: Cisco
    street: De Kleetlaan 64
    code: 1831
    city: Diegem
    country: Belgium
    email: evyncke@cisco.com
 -
    ins: B. Donnet
    name: Benoît Donnet
    organization: Université de Liège
    country: Belgium
    email: benoit.donnet@uliege.be
 -
    ins: J. Iurman
    name: Justin Iurman
    organization: Université de Liège
    country: Belgium
    email: justin.iurman@uliege.be

normative:

informative:
  LARGE_SCALE:
    title: Efficient Algorithms for Large-Scale Topology Discovery
    target: https://dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/1071690.1064256
    date: 2005
    seriesinfo:
      DOI: 10.1145/1071690.1064256
    author:
      -
        name: Benoît Donnet
        org: Université Pierre & Marie Curie Laboratoire LiP6–CNRS
      -
        name: Philippe Raoult
        org: Université Pierre & Marie Curie Laboratoire LiP6–CNRS
      -
        name: Timur Friedman
        org: Université Pierre & Marie Curie Laboratoire LiP6–CNRS
      -
        name: Mark Crovella
        org: Boston University Computer Science Department
  IPV6_TOPOLOGY:
    title: In the IP of the Beholder Strategies for Active IPv6 Topology Discovery
    target: http://www.cmand.org/papers/beholder-imc18.pdf
    date: 2018
    seriesinfo:
      DOI: 10.1145/3278532.3278559
    author:
      -
        name: Robert Beverly
        org: Naval Postgraduate School
      -
        name: Ramakrishnan Durairajan
        org: University of Oregon
      -
        name: David Plonka
        org: Akamai Technologies
      -
        name: Justin P. Rohrer
        org: Naval Postgraduate School
  IPV4_TOPOLOGY:
    title: Yarrp’ing the Internet Randomized High-Speed Active Topology Discovery
    target: http://www.cmand.org/papers/yarrp-imc16.pdf
    date: 2016
    seriesinfo:
      DOI: 10.1145/2987443.2987479
    author:
      -
        name: Robert Beverly
        org: Naval Postgraduate School


--- abstract

Active measurements at Internet-scale can target either collaborating parties or non-collaborating ones. Sometimes these measurements are viewed as unwelcome or aggressive. This document proposes some simple techniques allowing any party or organization to understand what this unsolicited packet is, what is its purpose, and more importantly who to contact.


--- middle

# Introduction

Active measurements at Internet-scale can target either collaborating parties or non-collaborating ones. Such measurements include {{LARGE_SCALE}} and {{?RFC7872}}.

Sending unsolicited probes should obviously be done at a rate low enough to not unduly impact the other parties resources. But even at a low rate, those probes could trigger an alarm that will request some investigation by either the party receiving the probe (i.e., when the probe destination address is one address assigned to the receiving party) or by a third party having some devices where those probes are transiting (e.g., an Internet transit router).

This document suggests some simple techniques allowing any party or organization to understand:

- what this unsolicited packet is,

- what is its purpose,

- and more significantly who to contact for further information or to stop the probing.

Note: it is expected that only researchers with no bad intentions will use these techniques.

# Probe / Measurement Description

## Probe Description URI {#uri}

This document defines a "probe description URI" (see {{text}}) as a URI pointing to:

- a "Probe Description", see {{text}}, e.g., "https://example.net/measurement.txt";

- an email address, e.g., "mailto:eric@example.net";

- a phone number to call, e.g., "tel:+1-201-555-0123".

## Probe Description Text {#text}

Similarly, as in {{!RFC9116}}, when a node probes other nodes over the Internet, it should create a text file following the syntax described in section 3 of {{!RFC9116}} and should have the following fields:

- contact;

- expires;

- preferred-languages.

Plus, another one "description" which is a URI pointing a document describing the measurement.

# Out-of-band Probe Attribution

When it is not possible to include the "probe description URI" in the probe packet itself, then a specific URI must be constructed based on the source address of the probe packet following {{!RFC8615}}, e.g., for a probe source address of 2001:db8::dead, the following URI are constructed:

- if the reverse DNS record for 2001:db8::dead exists, e.g., "example.net", then the URI is "https://example.net/.well-known/probing.txt" ;

- else (or in addition), the URI is "https://\[2001:db8::dead\]/.well-known/probing.txt". In this case, there might be a certificate verification issue.

The constructed URI must be a reference to the "Probe description Text" (see {{text}}).

# In-band Probe Attribution

When the desired measurement allows for it, one "probe description URI" should be included in the payload of all probes sent. This could be:

- for a {{!RFC4443}} ICMPv6 echo request: in the optional data (see section 4.1 of {{!RFC4443}});

- for a {{!RFC792}} ICMPv4 echo request: in the optional data;

- for a {{!RFC768}} UDP datagram: in the data part;

- for a {{!RFC793}} TCP packet with the SYN flag: data is allowed in TCP packets with the SYN flag per section 3.4 of {{!RFC793}} (2nd paragraph). However, it may change the way the packet is processed;

- for a {{!RFC8200}} IPv6 packet with either hop-by-hop or destination options headers, in a PadN option. However, the PadN option is not recommended: as per the informational {{?RFC4942}}, section 2.1.9.5, it is suggested that PadN options should only contain 0's and be smaller than 8 octets, thus limiting its use for probe attribution. Indeed, inserting the URI in PadN options could bias the measurement itself. For example, the Linux Kernel follows these recommendations since its version 3.5;

- etc.

The URI should start at the first octet of the payload and should be terminated by an octet of 0x00, i.e., it must be null terminated. If the URI cannot be placed at the beginning of the payload, then it should be preceded by an octet of 0x00.

Note: the above techniques produce a valid and legitimate packet for all the nodes forwarding the probe, except maybe for a hop-by-hop options header with a PadN option containing the URI. As for the receiver, it may or may not process the packet, depending on where the "probe description URI" is included (e.g., TCP SYN flag with the URI included in data, destination options header with a PadN option containing the URI). As a consequence, a response may not be received. The choice of the URI location is important but depends on the situation, which is why multiple possibilities are proposed in this document.

# Recommendations

Using either the out-of-band or in-band technique, or even both combined, highly depends on will or context. The authors recommend the following classification of priorities:

1. Both out-of-band and in-band
2. Out-of-band only
3. In-band only
4. None

Both out-of-band and in-band combined should be preferred. It could be used as an indirect means of "authenticating" the probe description URI in the in-band probe, thanks to a correlation with the out-of-band technique (e.g., a reverse DNS lookup). However, the out-of-band technique might not be possible due to several conditions: the presence of a NAT, too many endpoints to run a web server on (e.g., RIPE Atlas probes), dynamic source addresses, etc. In that case, the in-band solution should be preferred.

# Ethical Considerations

Executing some measurement experiences over the global Internet obviously require some ethical considerations when transit/destination non-solicited parties are involved.

This document proposes a common way to identity the source and the purpose of active probing in order to reduce the potential burden on the non-solicited parties.

But there are other considerations to be taken into account: from the payload content (e.g., is the encoding valid ?) to the transmission rate (see also {{IPV6_TOPOLOGY}} and {{IPV4_TOPOLOGY}} for some probing speed impacts). Those considerations are out of scope of this document.

# Security Considerations

While it is expected that only researchers with no bad intentions will use these techniques, they will simplify and shorten the time to identify a probing across the Internet.

This information is provided to identify the source and intent of specific probes, but there is no authentication possible for the inline information.  As a result, a malevolent actor could provide false information while conducting the probes, so that the action was attributed to a third party.  The recipient of this information cannot, as a result, rely on this information without confirmation.  If a recipient cannot confirm the information or does not wish to do so, they should treat the flows as if there were no attribution.

# IANA Considerations

The "Well-Known URIs" registry should be updated with the following:

- additional values (using the template from {{!RFC8615}}):

- URI suffix: probing.txt

- Change controller: IETF

- Specification document(s): this document

- Status: permanent



--- back

# Acknowledgments
{:numbered="false"}

The authors would like to thank Alain Fiocco, Fernando Gont, Ted Hardie, Mehdi Kouhen, and Mark Townsley for helpful discussions as well as Raphaël Léas for an early implementation.

The authors would also like to gracefully acknowledge useful review and comments received from Prapanch Ramamoorthy, and Warren Kumari.
